Database: Can be defined as the storage of inter related data that has been organised in such a fashion that the process of retrieving data is effective and efficient

Management System : A set of programs to store/access data

- An environment that is both convinient and efficient to use.

DBMS : why? 

Drawbacks of file system to store Data: 
  Data Redundancy 
  Inconsistency
  Difficulty in accessing data
  Data Isolation
  Integrity Problems
  Security
  Concurrent Usage

Dbase III, IV, Foxbase
Access

Data Modelling : A collection of tools for describing
  - Data
  - Data Relationship
  - Data Semantics
  - Data Constraints
Types
 HDBMS - Hierarchial Database Management System
 NDBMS - Network Database MS
 RDBMS - Relational Database Management System
 ORDBMS - Object Relational MS
   -Multimedia
   -Hypertext based

Architecture : 3 level
 Physical  -  Real Data stored as bits and bytes
 Conceptual/Logical - Database Designer/developers view
 Application - End users view


RDBMS : The relational models sorts data into tables/relations, each consisting of Columns and Rows. Columns represents attributes and rows data

Entity : is comparable to an object of high level language
Attributes : are descriptive features of an entity(properties)

Jargons:
Relation : table/s
Tuple : a row of data
Attribute : column/s of table
Degree : no.of attributes in a table
Cardinality : number of tuples

EF Codd : laid down 12 golden rules

Chen : Enity relational diagram (E-R diagram)

Relationships : are of 3 types
     1. one to one 
     2. one to many
     3. many to many

Null : is missing information, unknown 
Constraints : Broadly we have 3 type of constraints
1. Domain Integrity : Null,Not null, default, Check, unique ( can have one null and zero duplicates)
2. Entity Integrity : Primary Key (cannot have duplicates/null values)
3. Referential Integrity : Constraint enforced between 2 relations where one is dependent on the other for its data : Foreign Key (Always looks up the Primary key. Foreign Keys can have duplicate values and also null)

SQL Basics: Struture Query Lang
1. DDL - Data Definition lang(Create,Alter, Drop,Truncate,Rename )
2. DML - Data Manipulation Lang(Insert, Update, Delete )
3. DQL - Data Query Lang ( Select )
4. TCL - Transaction Control lang (Commit, Rollback )
5. DCL - Data Control Lang (Grant , Revoke )

Database Schema : Is one that contains all relevant objects


   Truncate                   vs           				    Delete
1. DDL command					      		      DML command
2. Cannot restrict no.of rows deleted		 			Can restrict no.of rows to be deleted
3. Cannot revert /undo truncate						Can revert using rollback
4. Faster										Slower than Truncate
5. Retains the structure							Retains the structure


RDBMS is based on Relational Algebra/set Theory

Selection/Restriction  - where 
Projection - specifying the column list
Join
Difference
Divide
Union



